# Input
</br>

C supports a number of ways for taking user input. </br>
**getchar()** Returns the value of the next single character input.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char z = getchar();
    printf("You entered: %c", z);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Hello
You entered: H
```
The input is stored in the variable **z**

The **gets()** function is used to read input as an ordered sequence of characters, also called a **string** </br>
A string is stored in a char array.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char z[100];
    gets(z);
    printf("You entered: %s", z);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Hello
You entered: Hello
```
Here we stored the input in an array of 100 characters. </br>
**scanf()** scans input that matches format specifiers.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int z;
    scanf("%d", &z);
    printf("You entered: %d", z);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Hello
You entered: 0
```
The **&** sign before the variable name is the **address operator**. It gives the address, or location in memory, of a variable. This is needed because **scanf** places an input value at a variable address

Let's prompt for two integer inputs and output their sum
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int a,b;
    printf("Enter two numbers:");
    scanf("%d %d", &a, &b);

    printf("Sum: %d", a+b);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Enter two numbers:25 15
Sum: 40
```
</br>

> **scanf()** stops reading as soon as it encounters a space, so text such as "Hello World" is two separate inputs for **scanf()**

</br></br>

# Output

</br>

We have already used the **printf()** function to generate output. Now let's cover several other functions that can be used for output.

**putchar()** Outputs a single character.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char a = getchar();

    printf("You entered: ");
    putchar(a);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Hello
You entered: H
```
The input is stored in the variable **a**.

The **puts()** function is used to display output as a **string** </br>
A string is stored in a char array.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char a[100];

    gets(a);

    printf("You entered: ");
    puts(a);

    return 0;
}
```
```
Hello
You entered: Hello
```
Here we stored the input in an array of 100 characters. </br>

</br></br>

# Formatted Input

</br>

The **scanf()** function is used to assign input to variables. A call to this function scans input according to format specifiers that convert input as necessary. 

If input can't be converted, then the assignment isn't made.

The **scanf()** statement waits for input and then makes assignments:
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int x;
    float num;
    char text[30];
    scanf("%d %f %s", &x, &num, text);

    return 0;
}
```
```
5
7.5 
Hello
```
Typing **5 7.5 Hello** and then pressing Enter assigns **5** to x, **7.5** to num, and **Hello** to text

Note that the **&** must be used to access the variable addresses. The **&** isn't needed for a string because a string name acts as a pointer.

Format specifiers begin with a percent sign % and are used to assign values to corresponding arguments after the control string. **Blanks, tabs, and newlines are ignored**.

A format specifier can include several options along with a conversion character: 

**%[*][max_field]conversion character**

The optional * will skip the input field.

The optional max_width gives the maximum number of characters to assign to an input field.

The conversion character converts the argument, if necessary, to the indicated type:

**d** decimal </br>
**c** character </br>
**s** string </br>
**f** float </br>
**x** hexadecimal
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int x, y;
    char text[20];

    scanf("%2d %d %*f %5s", &x, &y, text);
    printf("%d %d %s", x, y, text);

    return 0;
}
```
```
1234 5.7 Buddies
12 34 Buddi
```

</br></br>

# Formatting Output

</br>

The **printf** function was introduced in your very first Hello World program. A call to this function requires a **format string** which can include escape sequences for outputting special characters and format specifiers that are replaced by values.
```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("John got %d apples. \n", 15);

    printf("\"Hello World!\"\n");

    return 0;
}
```
```
John got 15 apples. 
"Hello World!"
```
Escape sequences begin with a **backslash \\**:

**\n** new line </br>
**\t** horizontal tab </br>
**\\\\** backslash </br>
**\b** backspace </br>
**\\'** single quote </br>
**\\"** double quote

Format specifiers begin with a **percent sign** % and are replaced by corresponding arguments after the format string. A format specifier can include several options along with a conversion character:
```c
%[-][width].[precision]conversion character
```
The optional - specifies left alignment of the data in the string. </br>
The optional **width** gives the minimum number of characters for the data. </br>
The **period .** separates the **width** from the **precision**. </br>
The optional **precision** gives the number of decimal places for numeric data. If **s** is used as the conversion character, then precision determines the number of characters to print. </br>

The conversion character converts the argument, if necessary, to the indicated type:

**d** decimal </br>
**c** character </br>
**s** string </br>
**f** float </br>
**e** scientific notation </br>
**x** hexadecimal

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Color: %s, Number: %d, float: %5.2f \n",
    "red", 52, 4.15568);

    printf("\nPi = %3.2f", 4.15568);

    printf("\nPi = %8.5f", 4.15568);

    printf("\nPi = %-8.5f", 4.15568);

    printf("\nThere are %d %s in the tree.", 12, "mangoes");

    return 0;
}
```
```
Color: red, Number: 52, float:  4.16 

Pi = 4.16
Pi =  4.15568
Pi = 4.15568
There are 12 mangoes in the tree.
```
To print the % symbol, use %% in the format string.
