# Arithmetic Operators
</br>

C supports arithmetic **operators** + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication), / (division), and % (modulus division).

Operators are often used to form a **numeric expression** such as 10 + 5, which in this case contains two **operands** and the addition **operator**.

Numeric expressions are often used in assignment statements.

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int length = 20;
    int width = 5;
    int area;

    area = length * width;
    printf("%d \n", area);  /* 100 */

    return 0;
}
```
```
100
```

## Division
</br>

C has two division operators: / and %.

The division / operator performs differently depending on the data types of the operands. When both operands are int data types, **integer division**, also called **truncated division**, removes any remainder to result in an integer. When one or both operands are real numbers (float or double), the result is a real number.

The % operator returns only the remainder of integer division. It is useful for many algorithms, including retrieving digits from a number. **Modulus division** cannot be performed on floats or doubles.

The following example demonstrates division:

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int i1 = 21;
    int i2 = 4;
    int quotient, remainder;
    float f1 = 8.9;
    float f2 = 5.2;
    float result;

    quotient = i1 / i2;     //5
    remainder = i1 % i2;    //1
    result = f1 / f2;       //1.711538
    
    return 0;
}
```

</br></br>

# Operator Precedence
</br>

C evaluates a numeric expression based on **operator precedence**.

The + and – are equal in precedence, as are *, /, and %.

The *, /, and % are performed first in order from left to right and then + and -, also in order from left to right.

You can change the order of operations by using parentheses ( ) to indicate which operations are to be performed first.

For example, the result of 5 + 5 * 4 is 25, where the result of (5 + 5) * 4 is 40.

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int a = 8;
    int b = 4;
    int c = 2;
    int result;
    result = a - b + c;     //6
    printf("%d \n", result);

    result = a + b / c;     //10
    printf("%d \n", result);

    result = (a + b) / c;   //6
    printf("%d \n", result);

    return 0;
}
```
```
6
10
6
```
</br>

> C may not evaluate a numeric expression as desired when the associative property allows any order. For example, x*y*z may be evaluated as (x * y) * z or as x * (y * z). If order is important, break the expression into separate statements.

</br></br>

# Type Conversion
</br>

When a numeric expression contains operands of different data types, they are automatically converted as necessary in a process called **type conversion**.

For example, in an operation involving both floats and ints, the compiler will convert the int values to float values.

In the following program, the **increase** variable is automatically converted to a **float**

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    float price = 7.50;
    int increase = 3;
    float new_price;

    new_price = price + increase;
    printf("New price is %4.2f", new_price);
    /* Output: New price is 10.50 */

    return 0;
}
```
```
New price is 10.50
```

Note the format specifier includes 4.2 to indicate the float is to be printed in a space at least 4 characters wide with 2 decimal places.

When you want to force the result of an expression to a different type you can perform explicit type conversion by **type casting**, as in the statements:

```c
# include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    float average;
    int total = 27;
    int count = 4;

    average = (float) total / count;
    /* average = 6.75 */
    return 0;
}
```

Without the type casting, average will be assigned 6.

Explicit type conversion, even when the compiler may do automatic type conversion, is considered good programming style.

</br></br>

# Assignment Operators
</br>

An **assignment statement** evaluates the expression on the right side of the equal sign first and then assigns that value to the variable on the left side of the =. This makes it possible to use the same variable on both sides of an assignment statement, which is frequently done in programming.

```c
int x = 4;
x = x + 1; /* x is now 5 */
```

To shorten this type of assignment statement, C offers the += **assignment operator**. The statement above can be written as

```c
x += 2; /* x = x + 2 */
```

Many C operators have a corresponding assignment operator. The program below demonstrates the arithmetic assignment operators

```c
int x = 5;
  
x += 1;  // 6
x -= 1;  // 4
x *= 3;  // 15
x /= 2;  // 2
x %= 2;  // 1
x += 3 * 2;  // 11
```

Look carefully at the last assignment statement. The entire expression on the right is evaluated and then added to x before being assigned to x. You can think of the statement as x = x + (3 * 2).
</br></br>

# Increment & Decrement

Adding 1 to a variable can be done with the **increment operator** ++. Similarly, the **decrement operator** -- is used to subtract 1 from a variable.
```c
x--;    /* decrement x by 1 */
y++;    /* increment y by 1 */
```
The increment and decrement operators can be used either **prefix** (before the variable name) or **postfix** (after the variable name). Which way you use the operator can be important in an assignment statement
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int a, b, c;
    
    c = 7;
    a = c--;  /* assign 7 to a, then decrement c to 6 */
    printf("a = %d \n", a);
    printf("c = %d \n", c);
    
    b = 7;
    a = ++b;  /* increment b to 8, then assign 8 to a */
    
    printf("\na = %d \n", a);
    printf("b = %d \n", b);

    return 0;
}
```
```
a = 7 
c = 6 

a = 8 
b = 8 
```
The **prefix** form increments/decrements the variable and then uses it in the assignment statement.

The **postfix** form uses the value of the variable first, before incrementing/decrementing it.
